# Learn the Clear Alphabet with Flashcards

Students can use the flashcards for learning and memorising the forty-eight sounds of English with the Clear Alphabet. The aim is to know the sounds by heart, so that they can look at any of the Clear Alphabet IDs (identifiers) on their own and say the sound straight away.

Instructions
1. Print the pages back to back onto thin card
2. Cut out the cards and laminate them, if possible, for extra durability.
3. For students: use the cards to learn the sounds by quickly testing yourself in spare minutes of the day, e.g. on the bus, at lunchtime, when you’re watching TV, etc.
4. For teachers: use the cards to test your class for a short period of time every day, just to keep the identifiers and sounds in your students’ minds, or give a set of cards to each student and encourage them to practise in pairs or small groups. You could use some or all of the activities below.

Key to Abbreviations
v / s = short vowel sound
v / l = long vowel sound
d = diphthong
c / v = voiced consonant (i.e. your vocal cords vibrate when you make it; feel your throat as you make a sound to find out whether it’s voiced or not; if it vibrates, it is voiced!)
c / u = unvoiced consonant (your vocal cords don’t vibrate when you make this kind of sound)
Note: it’s well worth getting students to learn the Clear Alphabet sounds with an extra layer of detail, so that they learn the concepts above. For example, that e isn’t only a vowel sound, but that it’s a short vowel sound; or that n isn’t only a consonant sound, but it’s a voiced consonant sound that makes your vocal cords vibrate – and also a friendly consonant sound. 

Suggested Classroom Activities
1. Put all of the cards on the table – simple side up – in front of your students. Say a sound, and the first to find the correct card is the winner. Or, say “voiced consonant” or “long vowel sound”, etc. (as above) and the first to find one is the winner.
2. Show a card with a sound on it and students have to say a word each that includes
this sound.
3. Students have to put several of the cards in order to make a simple word, e.g. “cat” = k a t
4. Or you could ask students to spell out their first name, or the make of their car, or their first pet’s name, etc., or one (or more) of any current vocabulary word or phrase, using the cards. You may need a few sets of cards to be able to do this.
5. Try this fun game for two students working in a pair (it could also be adapted for two small groups battling each other). Each student has half the cards from the set. They hold them in their hands in a (shuffled) pack so that the other student can’t see which cards they’ve got. The first student produces the first card and their partner has ten seconds (or five, if your group is at a good level!) to say an English word that contains that sound. If they are correct they get the card, and put it in a separate pile from the pack in their hands. If they are wrong, or can’t think of a word, the original student gets to keep the card, again putting it in a separate pile. Play alternates between the two students and continues until the students don’t have any cards left in their hands. The winner will be the student with the most cards at the end of the game (or at the end of an agreed period of time, e.g. fifteen minutes). A variation to make the game harder would be to insist on two words (or more) for each sound, or to get the students to write the words using the Clear Alphabet, as well as saying them.
6. Use the rhyming words to demonstrate how the same sounds in English can be achieved with very different spelling patterns. See also the information on Vowel Clusters and Consonant Clusters later in the dictionary. You could make the important point that English is not a phonetic language, and that the spelling of a word in English often bears little or no relation to the sounds that it contains.
7. Or use the rhyming words to get students saying lots of words with the same vowel sound out loud. You could even get them to write sentences using as many words which have the same vowel sound in them as possible, for example:
Sound: ee
Sentence: “Pete’s feet feel the need for speed each week.”
or:
Sound: ei
Sentence: “Jane’s Danish mate made it plain that her place in Spain was a waste of
space.”
Why not collect together the funniest or longest sentences and make a classroom display, or book